Physical Context [207 words]

Naga ed-Deir is located on the east bank of the Nile (Lat/Long - 26.3778 N, 31.9028 E), a rare exception to the tendency for mortuary sites to be found in the west. The most notable nearby site is Abydos, a center of early dynastic power. Naga ed-Deir can be found 28 km, about 17 miles, south (upriver) of Abydos. The cemetery's proximity to such an important city made it a popular burial site not only during the Old Kingdom but also well into the Middle Kingdom. Even though its popularity was reduced beyond the Middle Kingdom, Naga ed-Deir was still used and reused by families for the duration of the Egyptian State. This continued use can likely be attributed to the site's location in the heart of early Upper Egypt.

Many of the tombs incorporated limestone from the bedrock several forms: in slabs to cover mastaba entryways, in chips embedded in plaster, and even as a chamber cut out of the landscape. Local topography is described as "alluvial slopes and limestone cliffs (gebel), the latter divided by three large ravines" (Kroenke). Despite this rugged topography, the area remained highly trafficked, and as such, the majority of the tombs at Naga ed-Deir exhibited a high degree of disturbance.

Site Description [285 words]

The tombs of Naga ed-Deir represent burial traditions and styles from predominantly (but not exclusively) the Old and Middle Kingdoms; there are multiple examples of later use as well. Naga ed-Deir is not just a single mortuary site but rather a collection of cemeteries which served much of the area surrounding Abydos. There were four cemeteries belonging to the Early Dynastic period. In approximate date order they were designated by Reisner as N1500, N3000, N3500, and N500. Those four are located between two of the ravines (wadi) and can be found in image three. The other labeled cemetery shown in the image is N7000, believed to be a Predynastic cemetery.

These cemeteries were not usually made up of common graves that we think of today, but the ones from N7000 are the most similar. Predynastic tombs in N7000 were relatively uniform; they tended to be oval, and the burials themselves were also consistent. Bodies were placed in the fetal position on their left side with their head upriver (south). This would have pointed their faces to the west, believed to be where their afterworld was. Some of those tombs were roofed (usually with reed matting) and others were not, but none had a superstructure. Above-ground tomb coverings became more popular among later burials.

Those above-ground superstructures are called mastabas, the Arabic word for bench. Appearing first in the Early Dynastic period, they were usually rectangular and made of mud-brick, covering tombs in what tended to be an approximate north-south orientation. The mud-brick casing usually surrounded a core made of looser material. Several of the mastabas were joined by a courtyard on the western side, another reference to the journey from the tomb to the afterworld.

Excavations [295 words]

Naga ed-Deir first fell under the eye of the archaeological community in 1900 when the then-Chief Inspector of the Department of Antiquities, J.E. Quibell, found out that the site was threatened by looting. Another concern was the site's position relative to the flood plain, another threat to the integrity of the cemeteries. Quibell called on George Reisner, who worked at the University of California at the time, for the task of excavating Naga ed-Deir. Reisner was given the site concession at the end of 1900, and that first excavation (the Hearst Egyptian Expedition) begun the following year, lasting until 1904.

Reisner was a very scientific archaeologist for his time. He was less interested in flashy artifacts for museums and more keen on thoroughly investigating everything a particular site to offer. In that regard, Naga ed-Deir was special because the burials spanned (nearly continuously) six thousand years. This gave Reisner the opportunity to see development over time within the same space as opposed to spread out. One other point which piqued his interest was how several Predynastic skeletons were relatively well-preserved.

When the Hearst Egyptian Expedition ended, there was a hiatus until Reisner returned in 1910 and stayed until 1912. This time the expedition was run by the Harvard University-Boston Museum of Fine Arts. The final work done at the site occurred between 1923 and 1924, and during that time Reisner and his team finished mapping the site and taking photos of all the artifacts. Throughout all of Reisner's time at Naga ed-Deir, he was a huge proponent of archaeological photography as a tool for more comprehensive data collection. He and his team took over eight thousand photos during the Naga ed-Deir excavations, and those original copies are stored at the Musem of Fine Arts, Boston.

Significance [482 words]

As alluded to above, one of the most important characteristics of Naga ed-Deir is that it is representative of mortuary practices from the Predynastic Period up through the early New Kingdom. Even better, those data are nearly continuous over that time, demonstrating the evolution of graves and grave goods throughout the time of the Egyptian State. The ideal way to date a tomb was by a related inscription. Some inscriptions would mention the year, and some decorations referenced events which could be connected to overall Ancient Egyptian chronology. When those most convenient cases were not present, grave goods were examined in order to place them in seriation with other goods of the same category. Those categories included pottery, scarabs, jewelry, and more.

Each of those categories can be analyzed and ultimately ordered chronologically due to stylistic changes over time. For example, in scarabs, important features were the physical size measurements, the materials used to make them, how they were placed on the body, and different designs for the head, back, and sides. Many of these features became more complex over time, with symbols appearing on the undersides which evolved into geometric patterns. The specific parameters of a scarab found in chamber A of SF5021 helped indicate a date range; a symmetrical design of two seated humans placed it during the First Intermediate Period.

Although dating each tomb proved challenging, placing them in order at the very least gave invaluable insight into the progression of tomb models and mastabas. Naga ed-Deir provides evidence for the hypothesis that tomb superstructures did not come into fashion until after the Predynastic Period because no superstructures were found in Predynastic cemeteries. There were four large and well-preserved mastabas which date to the first and second Dynasties. It is important to remember that one site isn't representative of the entire state; one form of mastaba (niched facade) didn't appear in Naga ed-Deir as frequently as in other contemporary cemeteries. There were only two examples, dated to the third and fourth Dynasties.

Underneath superstructures, and inside the tombs themselves, grave goods were important not only to dating burials but also to discover larger sociologic context of the Abydos region. The wealth of a person was easy to be determined by the size of their burial and the goods with which they were buried. One group of objects which tended to appear in tombs of the elite were knife handles and palettes which were inscribed with symbols of Mesopotamian iconography. Those, along with cylinder seals originating in Mesopotamia, demonstrate very early contact and trade with the Near East. The grave goods which are perhaps the most intriguing to the common person, though, were two Letters to the Dead (shown in image 4), which illuminated how Egyptian Culture conceptualized the tomb as a home for the dead where they could receive messages which would ultimately help them pass to the afterlife.

Introduction [135]

One of the most fascinating aspects of Ancient Egyptian culture was their relationship with death and the afterlife. Much of what we know about that dynamic has been learned through archaeological expeditions to cemeteries across the Nile Valley. This particular burial ground, Naga ed-Deir, served one of the major regions of Upper Egypt for nearly the entire continuous duration of the Egyptian State. The vast span of Naga ed-Deir's use across time has made it an invaluable resource in the research of Ancient Egyptian mortuary practices. The continuity of activity at this site means that archaeologists have been able to work beyond the individuality of the artifacts and tombs which they have studied; they have been able to make connections with regard to how grave goods and the tombs which housed them developed over time.

Conclusion

The mortuary site known as Naga ed-Deir is located east of the Nile and in Upper Egypt, near the city of Abydos. Its geographical as well as topographical context, situated near limestone cliffs, contributed to the site's use as a group of cemeteries which served the Abydos region for a near-continuous six thousand years. The uniformly detailed nature of burials at Naga ed-Deir allude to the care with which Ancient Egyptians treated their dead. When George Reisner led an archaeological expedition to Naga ed-Deir, he had the patience to appreciate those details as opposed to just finding the shiniest artifacts and shipping them off to museums. During his research lasting on and off from 1901 to 1924, Reisner and his team meticulously photographed and cataloged all artifacts and excavation sites. The grave goods discovered helped date each tomb and even provided evidence of Egyptian-Mesopotamian contact in the Early Dynastic Period. 
